Service Models
Cloud services offered by various cloud service providers can be mainly categorized into the three Models 
1)	Infrastructure as a service (IAAS)
2)	Platform as a Service (PAAS)
3)	Software as a Service (SAAS).
IAAS (Infrastructure as a service). This is a form of cloud computing in which there is a shared responsibility between the service providers and users. The service providers manage the virtualisation, servers, storage and networking infrastructure while the clients or tenants scale and manage the operating system, middleware, runtime, data and applications. There are various types of IAAS offered by different cloud computing providers like GCP, AZURE, AWS, ORACLE, etc. examples are Amazon S3, EC2, Lambda, EFS, by AWS. Compute Engine, Cloud Storage, Virtual Private Cloud all By Google Cloud Platform. Azure VM and Azure disk storage by Microsoft Azure.
1)	AWS S3 Bucket : AWS simple storage service provides object storage, which is built for storing and recovering any amount of information or data from anywhere over the internet. It provides this storage through a web services interface. While designed for developers for easier web-scale computing. S3 provides 11 9’s of durability which ensures data is not lost. S3 allows up to 5TB of a single object to be stored at a time. Objects in S3 are immutable. Transferring data in from the internet to S3 is free but transferring out to other regions or to the internet incurs a fee.
2)	AWS EC2 : Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) provides scalable computing capacity in the Amazon Web Services (AWS) Cloud. Using Amazon EC2 eliminates your need to invest in hardware up front, so you can develop and deploy applications faster. You can use Amazon EC2 to launch as many or as few virtual servers as you need, configure security and networking, and manage storage. Amazon EC2 enables you to scale up or down to handle changes in requirements or spikes in popularity, reducing your need to forecast traffic. You can use EC2 instance when you need complete control of your computing resources and want to run any type of workload. When you launch an EC2 instance, you must choose an AMI and  an instance type. Launching an instance involves specifying configuration parameters including networking, security, storage and user data settings.
3)	Google Compute Engine : Google Compute Engine (GCE) Which is an equivalent of EC2 offered by AWS is an infrastructure as a service (Iaas) offering that allows clients to run workloads on Google's physical hardware. Google Compute Engine provides a scalable number of virtual machines (VMs) to serve as large compute clusters for that purpose. GCE can be managed through a RESTful application program interface (API), command line interface or web console. Compute Engine pricing is on a pay-per-usage basis with a one minute minimum, charged on a per-second basis.
4)	Azure VM : Just Like EC2 and Compute Engine, An Azure virtual machine is an on-demand, scalable computer resource that is available in Azure. Virtual machines are generally used to host applications when the customer requires more control over the computing environment than what is offered by other compute resources. When you leverage a virtual machine to host your application, you get the flexibility of virtualization without the need to buy or maintain any underlying physical hardware. That said, you will have to manage the typical tasks that are associated with any other server, including configuration, patch management, and software installation. Because they are quick and easy to set up, Azure virtual machines are often used to deploy development and test environments. Organizations will also use Azure virtual machines to host their applications in Microsoft Azure, due to their pay-as-you-go nature, which allows you to only pay for VM’s when you need them.
5)	Azure Functions : Azure Functions is an event driven, compute-on-demand experience that extends the existing Azure application platform with capabilities to implement code triggered by events occurring in Azure or third party service as well as on-premises systems. Azure Functions allows developers to take action by connecting to data sources or messaging solutions thus making it easy to process and react to events. Developers can leverage Azure Functions to build HTTP-based API endpoints accessible by a wide range of applications, mobile and IoT devices. Azure Functions is scale-based and on-demand, so you pay only for the resources you consume.
6)	AWS Lambda : AWS Lambda is an event-driven, serverless computing platform provided by Amazon as a part of Amazon Web Services. It is a computing service that runs code in response to events and automatically manages the computing resources required by that code. Lambda is a compute service that lets you run code without provisioning or managing servers. Lambda runs your code on a high-availability compute infrastructure and performs all of the administration of the compute resources, including server and operating system maintenance, capacity provisioning and automatic scaling, code monitoring and logging. With Lambda, you can run code for virtually any type of application or backend service. All you need to do is supply your code in one of the languages that Lambda supports.
PAAS (Platform as a service).  This is another form of cloud computing where there is a shared responsibility between the service providers and users. The service providers manage the runtime, middleware, operating system, virtualisation, servers, storage and networking infrastructure and the customer only focus on managing the application and data. The various Paas offerings by different Cloud providers includes AWS Cloud9, AWS CodePipeline, AWS CodeDeploy, Google App Engine, Cloud Dataflow, Azure CDN, App Services.
1)	Azure App Services : Azure App Service is an HTTP-based service for hosting web applications, REST APIs, and mobile back ends. You can develop in your favorite language, be it .NET, .NET Core, Java, Ruby, Node.js, PHP, or Python. Applications run and scale with ease on both Windows and Linux-based environments.
2)	Azure CDN : Azure Content Delivery Network (CDN) is CDN service provided by Azure Cloud Platform that enables in storing and accessing data on different content servers and locations – used by online or cloud services.  Azure CDN helps in providing better bandwidth and quick delivery of data by placing content delivery or storage servers near to users ( in different geographical locations). The Azure Content Delivery Network offers developers a global solution for delivering high-bandwidth content by caching the content on different locations.
3)	AWS Cloud 9 : AWS Cloud9 is a cloud-based integrated development environment (IDE) that lets you write, run, and debug your code with just a browser. It includes a code editor, debugger, and terminal. Cloud9 comes prepackaged with essential tools for popular programming languages, including JavaScript, Python, PHP, and more, so you don’t need to install files or configure your development machine to start new projects. Since your Cloud9 IDE is cloud-based, you can work on your projects from your office, home, or anywhere using an internet-connected machine. Cloud9 also provides a seamless experience for developing serverless applications enabling you to easily define resources, debug, and switch between local and remote execution of serverless applications. With Cloud9, you can quickly share your development environment with your team, enabling you to pair program and track each other's inputs in real time.
4)	Google App Engine : Google App Engine is a cloud computing platform as a service for developing and hosting web applications in Google managed data centers. Applications are sandboxed and run across multiple servers. App Engine offers automatic scaling for web applications as the number of requests increases for an application, App Engine automatically allocates more resources for the web application to handle the additional demand.
5)	AWS CodePipeline : AWS CodePipeline is a fully managed continuous delivery service that helps you automate your release pipelines for fast and reliable application and infrastructure updates. CodePipeline automates the build, test, and deploy phases of your release process every time there is a code change, based on the release model you define. This enables you to rapidly and reliably deliver features and updates. You can easily integrate AWS CodePipeline with third-party services such as GitHub or with your own custom plugin. With AWS CodePipeline, you only pay for what you use. There are no upfront fees or long-term commitments.
SAAS (Software as a service). All the services ranging from application, data, runtime, middleware, operating system, virtualisation, servers, storage and networking are managed and scaled by the service providers following the instructions of the client during provisioning. Examples of Saas solutions by Cloud providers includes Google Workspace, Dropbox, Salesforce, Cisco WebEx, Concur, GoToMeeting, github. Etc.
DATABASES
A database is an organized collection of structured information, or data, typically stored electronically in a computer system. A database is usually controlled by a database management system (DBMS). The different types of Database includes Relational databases and Non-relational Databases. 
Relational Databases : A relational database is a collection of information that organizes data points with defined relationships for easy access. In the relational database model, the data structures including data tables, indexes and views remain separate from the physical storage structures, enabling database administrators to edit the physical data storage without affecting the logical data structure.
In the enterprise, relational databases are used to organize data and identify relationships between key data points. They make it easy to sort and find information, which helps organizations make business decisions more efficiently and minimize costs. They work well with structured data. The data tables used in a relational database store information about related objects. Each row holds a record with a unique identifier known as a key and each column contains the attributes of the data. Each record assigns a value to each feature, making relationships between data points easy to identify.
The standard user and application program interface (API) of a relational database is the Structured Query Language. SQL code statements are used both for interactive queries for information from a relational database and for gathering data for reports. Defined data integrity rules must be followed to ensure the relational database is accurate and accessible. Examples of Relational databases engines includes Oracle, MySQL, SQL Server, PostgreSQL, IBM DB2, Microsoft Access, SQLite, MariaDB.
Non-Relational Databases : Non-relational databases (often called NoSQL databases) are different from traditional relational databases in that they store their data in a non-tabular form. Instead, non-relational databases might be based on data structures like documents. A document can be highly detailed while containing a range of different types of information in different formats. This ability to digest and organize various types of information side-by-side makes non-relational databases much more flexible than relational databases. 
Non-relational databases are often used when large quantities of complex and diverse data need to be organized. For example, a large store might have a database in which each customer has their own document containing all of their information, from name and address to order history and credit card information. Despite their differing formats, each of these pieces of information can be stored in the same document.
Non-relational databases often perform faster because a query doesn’t have to view several tables in order to deliver an answer, as relational datasets often do. Non-relational databases are therefore ideal for storing data that may be changed frequently or for applications that handle many different kinds of data. They can support rapidly developing applications requiring a dynamic database able to change quickly and to accommodate large amounts of complex, unstructured data.
When starting a project, it is worth considering relational vs non-relational databases, in terms of their differences, to get a better understanding of the right solution for the project. You can also consider different examples of the uses for both, and when you might want to choose one over the other. Applications must be able to query data efficiently and deliver results almost instantly. Non-relational databases are a natural choice for this kind of environment. They offer both security and agility, allowing for rapid development of applications in an agile environment. Easier and less complex to manage than relational databases, they can also yield lower data management costs while providing superior performance and speed.
Naturals for agile development, non-relational databases can accommodate the complexity of data inputs more efficiently than structured databases. In an age of increasing data complexity, non-relational databases provide the flexibility in database design that has become increasingly indispensable. Especially when paired with the cloud, non-relational databases lift the limits on your data collection, organization, and analysis, allowing you to get the most out of your data.
Relational Databases Vs Non-relational Databases
Relational Databases	Non-relational Databases
They work with structured data	They have the ability to store large amounts of data with little structure
Relationships in the system have constraints, which promotes a high level of data integrity	They provide scalability and flexibility to meet changing business requirements.

There are limitless indexing capabilities, which results in faster query response times.	They provide schema-free or schema-on-read options.

They are excellent at keeping data transactions secure.	They have the ability to capture all types of data “Big Data” including unstructured data.
They provide the ability to write complex SQL queries for data analysis and reporting.	They are document oriented.

Their models can ensure and enforce business rules at the data layer adding a level of data integrity not found in a non-relational database.	NoSQL or non-relational databases examples:MongoDB, Apache Cassandra, Redis, Couchbase and Apache HBase.

They are table and row oriented.	They are best for Rapid Application Development. NoSQL is the best selection for flexible data storage with little to no structure limitations.

They Use SQL (structured query language) for shaping and manipulating data, which is very powerful.	They provide flexible data model with the ability to easily store and combine data of any structure without the need to modify a schema.
SQL database examples: MySql, Oracle, Sqlite, Postgres and MS-SQL. NoSQL database examples: MongoDB, BigTable, Redis, RavenDb, Cassandra, Hbase, Neo4j and CouchDb	
SQL databases are best fit for heavy duty transactional type applications	



